feat: Support PodDisruptionBudgets (#394)
stackabletech/hdfs-operator: docs/modules/hdfs/pages/usage-guide/operations/pod_disruptions.adoc

> = Pod disruptions

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be Pod disruption budget?

Author: I would consider this a implementation detail. In the future we might want something more smart than PDBs, e.g. k8s asking the hdfs-operator "can i safely evict this pod?".
This would still count as Pod disruptions, but not PDB.
Same as we call the concept guide on affinities "Pod placement".

Reviewer: Yes and no.
"configure pod disruptions" sounds bad.

@adwk67 @Jimvin calling for a native speaker. I understand what Sebastian means. What do you think?

Author: The following link might give some inspiration :)
https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/disruptions/

Reviewer: I only commented here. I understand why you want to keep the title like this, but...

Reviewer 2: If we refer to "controlling pod disruptions" I think it is OK. That makes it a little more clear that whatever we configure is aimed at restraining disruptions rather than inviting them!

Author: Just to be sure: And heave that as the heading on the global concepts pages as well as in every operator?
@lfrancke does that work for you as well?

Author: That are the current concepts:
Honestly feels a bit weird that one of them will have a "Configure xxx" prefix, but I don't care too much ;)
![image](https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-operator/assets/29303194/0b21d7a4-55f1-4710-b6ba-44c64c2c2400)

Reviewer 3: "Configure ..." is something you would use for a guide. If you are explaining a concept, the concept should be the title of the page. But I would argue that the concept is more something like "Service stability" or "Reliability" (which can be affected by pod disruptions). The concept pages should explain things from taking a step back and looking at the big picture, contextualize. Here is something about it in the diataxis framework: https://diataxis.fr/explanation/#writing-good-explanation

Author: Would be great if we could reach a decision, so that I don't need to update 15 similar PRs later on :)
What would be your favorite?

Just as a reminder: What we are documenting here is what *this* operator is doing in terms of pod disruptions, e.g.  documenting how the PDBs are calculated. The concepts page is added in https://github.com/stackabletech/documentation/pull/454

Reviewer: Keep it as it is

> You can configure Pod disruptions for HDFS nodes as described in xref:concepts:operations/pod_disruptions.adoc[].

Reviewer: Same here

Author: Same above xD

Reviewer: ...."configure Pod disruptions" just sounds bad to me

Author: Yeah, agreed.
What about `You can influence Pod disruptions` or `You can control Pod disruptions` ?

Reviewer 3: "To prevent pod disruptions, you can configure PodDisruptionBudgets" maybe?

Author: I agree that this (currently) far easier for the user to understand. But I see problems with this in the future as described in my comment

> I would consider this a implementation detail. In the future we might want something more smart than PDBs, e.g. k8s asking the hdfs-operator "can i safely evict this pod?".
This would still count as Pod disruptions, but not PDB.

Reviewer: Then we can change the docs in the future.
Configure Pod disruptions just reads weird to me. But I'm fine with keeping it.

> Unless you configure something else or disable our PodDisruptionBudgets (PDBs), we write the following PDBs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unless you configure something else or disable our `PodDisruptionBudgets` (PDBs), we write the following PDBs:
```

Author: @fhennig I think our guidelines in https://docs.stackable.tech/home/stable/contributor/style_guide tell us to not format k8s objects, is that correct?

> [Use PascalCase for API objects](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-upper-camel-case-for-api-objects) such as ConfigMap or KafkaCluster

Reviewer 3: Yes, that is also how the k8s docs do it.

Author: thx!

> == Journalnodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== JournalNodes
```

> We only allow a single journalnode to be offline at a given time, regardless of the number of replicas or roleGroups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We only allow a single JournalNode to be offline at any given time, regardless of the number of replicas or `roleGroups`.
```

> == Namenodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== NameNodes
```

> We only allow a single namenode to be offline at a given time, regardless of the number of replicas or roleGroups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We only allow a single NameNode to be offline at any given time, regardless of the number of replicas or `roleGroups`.
```

> == Datanode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== DataNodes
```

> For datanodes the questions how many instances can be offline at the same time is a bit harder:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For DataNodes the question how many instances can be unavailable at the same time is a bit harder:
```

HDFS stores your blocks on the datanodes.
Every block can be replicated multiple times (to multiple datanodes) to ensure maximum availability.

> The default setting is a replication factor of `3` - which can be configured using `spec.clusterConfig.dfsReplication`. However, it is also possible to change the replication factor for a specific file or directory to something else than the cluster default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default replication factor is `3` - which can be configured using `spec.clusterConfig.dfsReplication`. However, it is also possible to change the replication factor for a specific file or directory to something other than the cluster default.
```

> When you have a replication of `3`, you can safely can take down 2 datanodes, as there will always be a third datanode one holding a copy of the block on the two unavailable datanodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have a replication of `3`, you can safely can take down 2 DataNodes, as there will always be a third DataNode holding a copy of each block currently assigned to one of the unavailable DataNodes.
```

> However, you need to be aware that you are now down to a single point of failure - the last of the three replicas!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you need to be aware that you are now down to a single point of failure - the last of three replicas!
```

> Taking this into consideration, our operator uses the following algorithm to determine the maximum number of datanodes allowed to be offline:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taking this into consideration, our operator uses the following algorithm to determine the maximum number of DataNodes allowed to be unavailable at the same time:
```

> `num_datanodes` is the number of datanodes in the HDFS cluster, summed over all roleGroups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`num_datanodes` is the number of datanodes in the HDFS cluster, summed over all `roleGroups`.
```

`dfs_replication` is default replication factor of the cluster.

[source,rust]
----
// There must always be a datanode to serve the block.
// If we would simply subtract one from the `dfs_replication`, we would end up
// with a single point of failure, so we subtract two instead.
let max_unavailable = dfs_replication.saturating_sub(2);

> // We need to make sure at least one datanode remains by having at max

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// We need to make sure at least one datanode remains by having at most
```

Author: done

// n - 1 datanodes unavailable. We subtract two to avoid a single point of failure.
let max_unavailable = min(max_unavailable, num_datanodes.saturating_sub(2));
// Clamp to at least a single datanode allowed to being, to not block Kubernetes nodes
// from being not able to drain.
let max_unavailable = max(max_unavailable, 1)
----

This results e.g. in the following numbers:

[cols="1,1,1"]
|===
|Number of datanodes
|Replication factor
|Maximum unavailable datanodes

|1
|<any factor>
|1

|2
|<any factor>
|1

|3
|<any factor>
|1

|4
|1, 2, 3
|1

|4
|4, 5 or higher
|2

|5
|1, 2, 3
|1

|5
|4
|2

|5
|5 or higher
|3

|100
|1, 2, 3
|1

|100
|4
|2

|100
|5 - 100
|<replication factor> - 2

|===

== Reduce rolling redeployment durations
The default PDBs we write out are pessimistic and will cause the rolling redeployment to take a considerable amount of time.

> As an example, when you have 100 datanodes and a replication factor of `3`, we can safely only take a single datanode down at a time. Assuming a datanode takes 1 minute to properly restart, the whole re-deployment would take 100 minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, when you have 100 DataNodes and a replication factor of `3`, we can safely only take a single datanode down at a time. Assuming a DataNode takes 1 minute to properly restart, the whole re-deployment would take 100 minutes.
```
